Graphics Library
A graphics library is a program library designed to aid in rendering computer graphics to a monitor. This typically involves providing optimized versions of functions that handle common rendering tasks. This can be done purely in software and running on the CPU, common in embedded systems, or being hardware accelerated by a GPU, more common in PCs. By employing these functions, a program can assemble an image to be output to a monitor. This relieves the programmer of the task of creating and optimizing these functions, and allows them to focus on building the graphics program. Graphics libraries are mainly used in video games and simulations.
Vulkan is the latest Graphics Library usage in GNU and Linux based operating systems. Windows 10 use free Nvidia and AMD, while some APIs use  Graphics Library (GL) in their name, notably OpenGL and WebGL

The Enlightenment Foundation Libraries (EFL) are a set of graphics libraries that grew out of the development of Enlightenment, a window manager and Wayland compositor. The project's focus is to make the EFL a flexible yet powerful and easy to use set of tools to extend the capabilities of both the Enlightenment window manager and other software projects based on the EFL. The libraries are meant to be portable and optimized to be functional even on mobile devices such as smart phones and tablets.
The libraries were created for version 0.17 of the window manager.
EFL is developed by Enlightenment.org with some sponsorship from Samsung, ProFUSION and Free.fr. EFL is free and open source software
Evas is the EFL canvas library, for creating areas, or windows, that applications can draw on in an X Window System. The EFL uses hardware-acceleration where possible to allow it to work faster, but is also designed to work on lower-end hardware, falling back to lower color and quality for graphics if necessary. Unlike most canvas libraries, it is primarily image-based (as opposed to vector-based) and fully state-aware (the vast majority of canvases are stateless, requiring the programmer to keep track of state).
Eina: Eina is the base library of all data types used by the EFL. It is designed to reduce CPU-usage as much as possible without using too much memory. It provides list (and inlined list), hash, red-black tree, shared string, rectangle, array, iterator and accessor, memory pool, module, fixed point and magic check helper.
The library itself is small and could easily be used without any other EFL libraries.
As I was search through the internet I jotted the above document (on the graphics libraries) from Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

 Reference:
1.	Jump up “Elightenment news page”. 2017-2-19. 
2.	Jump up “Enlinghtenment as standalone wayland compositor”. 02-01-2014.
3.	Jump up “Enlightenment Sponsors”. Enlightenment.org.
4.	Jump up to: Molten VK: Vulkan on iOS and Mac OS.
5.	Jump up “cairographics.org”. 
6.	Jump up “Clutter Project-Have fun!”. clutter-project.org.
