The Rate of Production:
Technical report rate became so high and overwhelming. The technical report not precise because many of the writers were inexperience in writing technical report.
The basic reason for lack of clarity are sometimes difficult to identify and it varies from author to author but inexperience of author is one of the reason for poor technical writing. But with a few discussions of basic principle of report writing suffice to improve considerably the quality and lucidity of their report 
The purpose of the report is to present information, many authors consider this as if it is not very important. Author should be more concern in presenting information clearly to reader rather than demonstrating their erudition to make it clear to their reader.
The presume purpose to present information is frequently forgotten in the author’s desire to show his own brilliance, to impress the reader or to destroy their rivals or to get a raise. A report should be clear and informative, the other objective will be automatically attained too.
This basic view point is fundamental. When writing a report, put your reader in mind. The reader might not be very familiar with your subject. Clarity and concise report will help your reader grasp the information you are presenting and save time. Admit error and find time to correct any inadequacies that became apparent. The high degree of thoroughness and perfection that characterize their work, however is often unattainable in many modern laboratories. The hectic pace of modern research frequently results in studies that, although useful, have rather significant faults or weaknesses. Reader is aware of the origin of such difficulties and is not interested in blaming any one. it is better to indicate the inadequacy of the report rather than make the reader dig it out by himself. 
The remedy for such apparently illogical outbreak is to avoid secondary motives and efforts at elegance and to stay close to straight scientific reporting. It is preferable not to use complex words except they are necessary.
CLEAR THOUGHTS, CLEARLY EXPRESSED
WORDS.
Only a few remarks are needed, with regard to choose of words. Avoid using a rare word unless it is essential. Foreign words and phrases should not be used. It will make your reader find your paper more difficult to follow. In your report clarity and easy readability is very important.
Sentences.
The sentence should not be too long, it should be limited to about 35 words. Reader always find it difficult to follow very long sentences. There must be indication as to how it is related to the preceding sentence and the sentence that follows, or to the development of the paragraph.  Such tie-in   wording makes your report difficult for your reader and it is indirectly force the reader to figure out the connection of sentence. As you are composing each sentence, indicate by appropriate wording how it is related to the preceding sentence. It will make it easy for your reader to follow and understand. Avoid or eliminate ambiguous phraseology from your sentence. Make the meaning of every word, phrase and sentence very clear, precise and concise to eliminate ambiguity. It is very important to repeat the fact or idea more than once in your report, but avoid treating it every time as a brand-new material,
The paragraph of your report should clearly show how the sentences are related to one another, both to the preceding sentence and the following sentence; likewise, the paragraph.
Not far from the beginning of your paragraph, the subject matter must become apparent. Don’t let your reader read on and on while wondering just how the paragraph fits into your report.  Make your paragraph short with specific idea. 
ORGANIZATION OF A TECHNICAL REPORT
Different writers have different methods of organizing their reports and some seem to have no discernible method at all. Most of the better writers, however, appear to be in remarkable close agreement as to the general approach to organization. Which is stating the problem, describing the method of attack, developing the result, discussing the result and summarizing the conclusions.
This type of organization is not universally accepted but most readers and most of the better writers seems to prefer it. The straightforward organization, then is recommended here, it seems basically more logical, and also your reader will be more familiar with it and will therefore  have to expend less effort in understanding your paper if it is so organized.
The typical report of experimental research is organized roughly in sequence as follows: introduction, equipment, text, results, discussion and conclusions.
The introduction may be written in straightforward manner by describing enough of the background to show where or how the problem arose and how important it is. This introduction will assure your reader that you actually  know the background well enough to write it accurately, with the emphasis placed correctly.
As a technical writer, do all necessary things to have sufficient background of the subject matter to compose an opening that will not confuse the reader with inaccurate or off-key statements. When an adequate review of the background, with enough detail to clarify the precise contribution of the report, would be much too long be in included in the introduction, summarize it in the first section of the introduction and provide a separate chapter for the detailed background.
Having pointed out where the problem exists, or, in general, what the background is, now state broadly what it is that you have tried to contribute by your research and along whatever general lines you have worked.
Your reader is now aware of what you have tried to do and why. At this point add a final portion to the introduction, in which you state more specifically what types of tests and analyses were made, the range of the variable considered, and similar information that broadly defines the nature and extent to your work. This will make the reader get an insight into the scope and thoroughness of your research and will know what to expect in the report.
These three sections thus constitute the typical introduction. Most of the time the three sections are found in three paragraphs, but such sharp separation is not necessary. The paragraph that each section require may vary but all three sections may be contained in one paragraph. 
APPARATUS AND TESTS- normally, the final portion of your introduction will have provide enough insight into the nature of your study, and justify your choice of equipment or technique is needed. You may then simply give a straightforward description of your equipment under apparatus. If, however, some ingenuity was involved, be sure that your presentation makes the matter clear. This is to present the new idea or thigh with enough emphasis to make your reader understand the new idea or the new thing.
Result and discussion: 
Some authors prefer, wherever possible, to present all their experimental result (as in the form of charts or tables) first under result, and then to discuss them, other prefer to discuss their results as they are presented. Sometimes the subject matter develops in such a way that one or the other method is obviously to be preferred. Although this part of a report is normally the most important part, adequate presentation depends mainly on careful and logical analysis of the material rather than on rules of report writing.
Always bear the introduction in mind while you present your data, and show by your discussion how these data shed light on the problem or, in general, to what extent your original stated objectives were achieved.
Organization along some such line is essential. Avoid a rambling disorganized presentation. Above all, avoid the ponderous revelation of unenlightening trivial.
Conclusions: your results and discussion will already have brought out the main contributions of your work. It has become standard practice, however, to gather together these main contributions and enumerate them in a final section called conclusions. Essentially, the conclusions state concisely (seldom more than two sentences per conclusion) what you have concluded from your research. They should be written with little or no reference to the body of the report, as a favor to those readers who likes to go directly from the introduction to the conclusions, in order to see how it turned out. Conclusion should be approximately self-sufficient to minimize the possibility of a misunderstanding if they are quoted. 
Sometimes the research turns out in such a way that enumerating sharply drawn conclusions is practically impossible. In such cases a short discussion of the problem and what you learned and believe about it should be given under conclusions. In some other situation, a frank discussion of the situation, together with, possibly, suggestions for future research, is preferable in such cases to drawing uninteresting or irrelevant conclusions. Such a final section is generally entitled concluding remarks.
CHAPTER HEADING
In the preceding discussion, the chapter headings were assumed to be the standard ones previously mentioned. Although these headings are quite satisfactory, more specific titles are preferable whenever they can be used. Thus, instead of Apparatus, you might use wind Tunnel and Models (or two separate chapters, one entitled wind Tunnel, the other Models), instead of results and Discussion, you might use dihedral effect, longitudinal stability, and soon (again, there is no objection to having several main heading to replace Results and Discussion.
Table, charts and figures- The inexperienced writer tends to present his numerical results in the form of tables, usually because he has studied his result so thoroughly that he can see the significant trends from the numbers themselves. The reader, however, is much less familiar with the result and may fail to see from the tables the trends that seems so obvious to the author. In general, visual presentation by means of charts or curve will put across your point much more effectively. You should give considerably thought to the question of how to plot your result so that their message will be most easily grasped.
State clearly in the text what each figure shows and how the figure shows it. Avoid referring to figure in so casual a manner, that the reader himself must determine how the figure is related to your discussion.
Summary- Among the scientific journals there are a number, such as science Abstracts, chemical abstracts, and applied mechanical review, that provide abstract summaries, of practically all published papers in their field. The summary that you append to your paper is your contribution to this effort, and it should be prepared in such a way as to lighten the abstractor’s burden. That is, it should be capable of being used directly as the abstract or of being easily summarized further if a relatively short abstract is desired.
In general, the summary should contain only a minimum of background and should proceed as quickly as possible to describe what was learned. Considering that the report itself may not readily accessible to the reader, put into the summary what you consider to be the most valuable contributions that the report makes, including the most significant conclusions and some mentioned of interesting techniques or concepts. In any case, include enough so that the reader can determine whether he should exert himself to get a copy of the report itself for closer study.
Note that the summary is not actually a part of the report itself, so that duplication of portions of the report need not be avoided.
The analytical Research Report:
Theoretical or analytical papers may not fit into standard organizational patter as readily as do the usual experimental papers. The remarks previously made with regard to the introduction and conclusion still apply, but the body of the paper is arranged in whatever manner seems most logical. Accordingly, you might do well to include near the beginning of such a report an overall view of your line of development, and as you begin each chapter, indicate what will be done in that chapter and how it fits into the development.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISMS
After your paper has been completed, it will generally be reviewed by one or more separate reviewers or by a reviewing committee. Many authors seem to consider such a review to be an unwarranted impertinence and they approach the review with various bewildering psychological defenses. Such attitudes are absurd. Your purpose should be to make your paper more readable and more accurate scientifically.
Consider all comments and suggestions carefully. Some of them may be incorrect or may indicate that the reviewer has not understood you. If an appreciable likelihood exists, try to revise the material so that this danger will be minimized. Remember at all times that it will be clear to the reader even when you are not present to explain it.
The Technical Talk
Simplicity
You will be given, say 20 minutes in which to present to the visiting scientists a review of your research. You first reaction is to insist that you need more than 20 minutes. Your argument will be rejected, however, so you eventually proceed complainingly to your task. Your mission will usually be successfully accomplished if you leave him with a fairly clear impression of the nature of your work and of your most significant results or contribution.
In preparing your talk, your daily technical subject and deciding just what fundamental progress you have made, or what new fundamental idea you have developed, that you wish to give your hearer to carry away with him. In fact, you will do better not to reacquaint yourself with the details at this time, because if you yourself have forgotten them they certainly do not represent the basic new ideas or contributions that you would like your hearer to remember. You should consider how to organize your presentation with utmost simplicity and logic,to maximize the probability that your hearer will absorb your story. All that you should do is to present information and understandable a story as possible within the allotted time.
Choice of language and general approach.
As a result of your years of experience in conversation, both technical and nontechnical, you should develop a speaking style that is not too demanding of either your own or your listener’s mental process; and that serves satisfactorily to convey your idea. This speaking style, in general, is entirely different from that of a printed technical report. The point emphasized here is that, in general, merely reading or reciting a carefully written technical report does not constitute a technical talk.  You should not expect the audience at a technical conference to understand you if you poured forth such formal language-especially if you spoke rapidly and with an expressionless voice.
The conclusion, then is that the technical talk is a monologue, presented in whether conversational, or perhaps teaching, manner is natural to you, in which you try your very best to get across a few basic ideas to your audience. Since the man in your audience cannot reexamine any sentence or paragraph that he finds confusing, you must make every thought clear enough to be understood the first time. If the thought is a difficult one, you may even find it best to repeat it. You may repeat it in the identical words or you may use different words and a slightly different approach.
In general, the talk should not be written out during its preparation. Compose it entirely in your mind, and, as you compose each sentence, make the hand motions, hesitation, facial expression, and so that will accompany it. Ask yourself whether it will be clear, and if not sure, struggle with it some more. After you are satisfied with your opening sentences, your conclusions, and a few others especially critical sentences, you may write them down in order to assure having them exactly as you composed them.
It is not intended here to imply that preparing and delivering a talk in this manner is simple task for the inexperienced. On the other hand, the task is not nearly so formidable as many people seem to believe. The technique is merely one more of those that could not be taught in your formal schooling but that you have to learn in order to be effective in your job.
Does the danger of stage fright make you want to rely on written copy? Actually, much less reason exist for emotional reactions in technical talks than in typical college “public speaking.” In the technical talk, the contents are of paramount importance, while the speaker is merely the medium through which they are presented. Bear in mind, that you are not required to give a polished performance, but only a clear one. Your listeners are not interested in judging you. They want only to understand what you are telling them.
VISUAL AID
You should use visual aids in your talk. Instead of being shown on paper or on the blackboard, your illustrative material will normally be on charts or slides, prepared in advance with all necessary accuracy, clarity, and neatness.
Actually, your chats and slide form the backbone of your talk, and each must be presented with utmost effort at clarity. Make every effort to keep your chart and slide simple. As has already been emphasized, your purpose is to get across a few basic ideas rather than to present large quantities of information.
ORGANIZATION AND CONTENTS
The organization and contents of a technical talk are, in general, similar to those of the written report, although a certain degree of flexibility is permissible for the purpose of increasing clarity or of maintaining interest. Emphasis will be on no more than a very few topic, and all the incidental materials that would be meticulously detailed in a printed report will be largely eliminated from the talk. Here, of course, your language and manner are especially important-while curtailing your remark on experiment techniques, you must nevertheless give your audience a feeling of reasonable confidence in your results.
Technical talk frequently seems to be organize around slides or other visual material. The talks seem to consist only of descriptions and discussion of the slides and even the introduction and conclusions may depend on slides. There is no objection of such a presentation, so long as the speaker get his message across. Slide and charts should be composed along with the talk, not before it. Avoid preparing them first and then trying to decide what to say about them, because a considerable loss of smoothness and logic may result.
The printed version.
If a printed version of your talk is to be included in published proceedings of the meeting, write it in the more formal style of printed reports; but by no means feel obliged to carry over the same language and coverage into the talk itself. The printed version may, indeed, include data and discussion that had figures and tables that were not used in the talk itself. Such extensions of the paper should be held within bounds, however; published proceedings of technical meetings are not usually intended as substitutes for normal published reports.
